* TOC
{:toc}

# Trimming and quality filtering of NGS data

Once we have inspected our data & have an idea of how accurate our reads are, as well as any other technical issues that may be within the data, we may need to trim or filter the reads to make sure we are aligning or analysing sequences that accurately represent our source material.  As we’ve noticed, the quality of reads commonly drops off towards the end of the reads, and dealing with this behaviour is an important part of most processing pipelines. Sometimes we will require reads of identical lengths for our downstream analysis, whilst other times we can use reads of varying lengths. The data cleaning steps we choose for our own analysis will inevitably be influenced by our downstream requirements.

## The Basic Workflow

Data cleaning & pre-processing can involve many steps, and today we will use the basic work-flow as outlined below  analysis is slightly different so some steps may or may not be required for your own data  steps do have a little overlap, and some pipelines (e.g. *Stacks*) may perform some of these steps for you.

Using today’s datasets, we will take one sequencing experiment hrough demultiplexing and adapter removal, and then use our *C. elegans* WGS to run genome mapping and alignment filtering. We will perform most steps on files at this stage, rather than on a complete library, but the principle is essentially the same.

*A basic workflow is:*

1. **Remove Low Quality Reads** (`fastq_illumina_filter`). *As discussed earlier, this may or may not be required*
2. **Remove Adapters** (`AdapterRemoval`)
3. **Remove Low Quality Bases**. This is usually done by our adapter removal tools, and can be performed by trimming:
    1. based on quality scores 
    2. to a fixed length
4. **Alignment** to a reference (`bwa`, `bowtie2`, `STAR`)
5. **Post-alignment QC** (`picard markDuplicates`, `IGV`)


cutadapt->AdapterRemoval (update)


#### Questions
{:.no_toc}

*How many read pairs were extracted in each sample?*

*Run the command again without the one mismatch. How many read are now in each?*

## Removal of Low Quality Reads and Adapters

Adapter removal is an important step in many sequencing projects, mainly projects associated with small DNA/RNA inserts. For example, a common RNAseq experiment is to sequence small non-coding RNAs that are generated by an indvidual to regulate other coding sequences. These small RNAs (namely miRNAs, snoRNAs and/or siRNAs) are generally between 19-35bp, which is significantly smaller than the shortest, standard read length of most Illumina MiSeq/NextSeq/HiSeq machines (usually have read length settings such as 50, 75, 100, 125, 250 or 300bp). Therefore it is important to trim adapters accurately to ensure that the genome mapping and other downstream analyses are accurate.

Previously we would run multiple steps to remove both low-quality reads, but today's trimming algorithms have become better at removing low-quality data and the same time as removing adapters.
The tool we'll use today is [`AdapterRemoval`](https://buildmedia.readthedocs.org/media/pdf/adapterremoval/latest/adapterremoval.pdf).

Now we can trim the raw data using the Illumina Nextera paired-end adapters obtained from [this website](https://support.illumina.com/bulletins/2016/12/what-sequences-do-i-use-for-adapter-trimming.html)
These are commonly used in Illumina projects.

Before we perform adapter trimming, look at the following code.

```
cd ~/WGS
mkdir -p 02_trimmedData/fastq
AdapterRemoval \
	--file1 01_rawData/fastq/SRR2003569_sub_1.fastq.gz \
	--output1 02_trimmedData/fastq/SRR2003569_sub_1.fastq.gz \
	--minlength 35 \
	--trimns \
	--trimqualities \
	--minquality 20 \
	--gzip \
	--settings adaptor_removal.settings
```

#### Question
{:.no_toc}
*1. What did the settings* `--minlength 35` *and* `--minquality 20` *do in the above?*

<!--FIXME(kortschak) What to do here? I'm not sure of the AdaptorRemoval logging output.-->
The `cutadapt` tool produces a large amount of information about the trimming process
In the above we wrote this output to a log file using the `>` symbol to redirect `stdout` to a file.
Let's have a look in the file to check the output.

```
less cutadapt.log
```

As these were a good initial sample, it's not surprising that we didn't lose many sequences.
Notice that many reads were trimmed, but were still long enough and high enough quality to be retained.

The relatively even spread of A/C/G/T bases after the adapters also indicates that we've not missed anything.
Sometimes, if we've missed a base in the adapter you'll see a strong bias in the first base after adapter removal.

### FastQC

Before moving on, we need to check the quality of the trimmed sequences, so let's run `fastqc` on these files to check them out.
*Make sure you're in the correct directory first!*

```
mkdir -p 02_trimmedData/FastQC
fastqc -o 02_trimmedData/FastQC -t 2 02_trimmedData/fastq/*gz
```
#### Question
{:.no_toc}
*Was there much of an improvement in the trimmed data?*

<!--FIXME(kortschak): add in instructions for this

### Starting the aligner

do this now
-->